Dear digital media composers,

I’m very excited for this course. But also a little anxious. You see, I’ve spent much of my adult life thinking about how to do things with words – first as a poet, carving language into art; then as a compositionist, teaching academic writing and thinking; and more recently in my role as a digital researcher, where I work with the words and syntax of programming languages... often, to organize and study other people’s words. I’m comfortable with that kind of text, that *alphanumeric* text.

But this course, Composing Digital Media, is here in part to remind us that there are other kinds of texts, and other kinds of writing, than what we do with words. This course takes me out of my comfort zone, pushing me, for example, to re-see the cover of a book or the side of a cereal box as composed of multiple elements, arrayed just so; or to think about the sound effects in a TV show and realize they were added later, chosen to adjust the mood or highlight certain actions. Most importantly, this course pushes all of us not just to notice, but to build: to see if we can recreate an effect we see, or make a different choice, and see what happens.

I’ve arranged the units of the course to build on each other, adding a new layer or wrinkle while carrying forward something of what we’d done previously. In the first unit, we’ll think about the affordances of digital media: that is, what’s made possible by working with bits instead of paper, even when we are still working with words? How do the answers change, or shift, as we move beyond words into aural and visual modes? The vocabulary we build here, at the start of class, will carry through the semester as a set of lenses, shaping what we pay attention to. In this first unit, rather than build a particular object, we’ll get used to using *version control software* with our writing, which is to say, we’ll keep track of what’s changing from microdraft to microdraft; the tools we’ll use here are Git and GitHub, which were developed for computer programming, but are adaptable to any kind of digital composing. In fact, GitHub is how we'll be hosting nearly all the materials for this course, including our discussion forum and your projects-in-progress.

The second unit is focused on *soundwriting*; it adds a layer of simultaneity by allowing several audio tracks to play at once (as opposed to the single linearity of prose text). We'll take a little tour of our sonic neighborhood to practice paying attention to the sounds of the spaces around us, and the stories those sounds tell, sometimes below the level of conscious awareness. The major project for this unit is a *soundscape narrative* of your own design, whether documentary, fictional, or even science-fictional: I'll ask you to record and rearrange the sounds that surround you, using Audacity as our tool of choice.

Unit three moves into *visual rhetorics*, adding multiple layers of depth to our x-y grid, even as we lose the axis of time. (Apologies to anyone who was especially excited to work on video; I had to sacrifice something in designing this course, and video editing was the one arena in which I didn't know of a good free software platform.) The major project in this unit is a kind of collage, but one which makes an argument through its juxtaposition of images and text. Though some of you may have some experience with Photoshop, I'd like us all to try GIMP this time around: it's nearly as powerful, and because it's free, you'll be able to keep using it easily after graduation.

The fourth unit, and with it the third major project, take us deeper into the computer's stack: we'll be working with HTML and CSS, two of the major building blocks of the world-wide web. (Sorry, JavaScript fans; no direct instruction from me this term.)

Unit five will be a collaborative project, asking you to put it all together. My main thought here is that we can design Twine games: interactive stories that let readers choose among the branching paths of possibilities you create. One risk of group work, often, is that one member will have to sacrifice their own vision out of deference to the team. With branching games, you can explore multiple possibilities, allowing for multiple play-throughs with alternate endings!

That being said, I want to hold open the possibility that you have a vision of what this course can offer you, a vision I haven't yet made room for. If you can convince a team of your classmates to sign on to your proposal for an alternate group project, I'm here to support you in that branching path, as well.

<!-- With these broad frameworks in mind, we’ll move into the heart of the course, a series of short units each emphasizing a different mode. In the visual unit, you’ll assemble multiple assets, including photographs and fonts, into a text that aims to pull people in. In the aural unit, you’ll re-mediate an alphanumeric text, adding voice and sonic textures to heighten its effects. And in the markup unit, you’ll explore the code behind the Web, and learn to restyle and reshape what you find there. -->
<!-- At the end of that unit, you’ll each propose a grand experiment: a digital media composing project large enough to support the work of three or four people over four or five weeks. We’ll take a vote, and the winning projects will move forward. -->
My goal with this structured first half of the term and more open second half is to acknowledge what is, really, somewhat obvious: there’s no way to learn all there is to know about Composing Digital Media in one semester, or maybe a lifetime. Even if I could teach you every aspect of a single program, there are many more out there, all of them changing with each new release, each new competitor. Instead, what I hope the course can teach you, what I hope you’ll learn, are strategies for dealing with that endless churn – a sense of what to look for, and where to look, to figure out the next new tool, and the next, and the next.

Throughout the semester, we’ll be seeking new tricks, led first by our projects and goals, and sharing what insights we find. I’ll ask you to read and respond to both model texts and arguments; to reflect in writing frequently on the choices you’re making, and why; and, above all, to keep making choices, and making new things. As Doug Hesse put it recently, you can’t learn to play piano just by reading about the piano; why should we expect any differently about writing, in any form?

At this point, you might be wondering about grades. Here’s the deal: if you participate actively, and meet some baseline unit criteria that we come up with together, your minimum grade – the minimum, not a guarantee, but a floor – is B. I’ve got a four-page packet explaining what that means, and how you can go up or down from there, but that’ll be part of the reading for homework.

I don’t expect us all to become concert-solo ready in just fifteen weeks. But I am looking forward to rehearsals.

All best,

Benjamin Miller
(please call me Ben)
